#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass dissertation
\begin_preamble
\bibpunct{(}{)}{,}{a}{,}{,}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\master main.lyx
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding default
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type numerical
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
General conclusions and discussion
\begin_inset CommandInset label
LatexCommand label
name "chap:General-conclusions-and"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Syntheses
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This study concerns Longshore Sediment Transport, more specifically with
 the methods to predict it.
 In this chapter I present summaries of the conclusions of each chapter
 and an overall discussion.
 I finish with some recommendations for future research and for the potential
 application of the knowledge here presented.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The so-called bulk formulas were studied on Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:Bulk-LST-formulas"

\end_inset

.
 In that chapter I analyzed the results of the most used formulas (CERC
 and Kamphuis) and a more recent one (Bayram) with an extensive data set
 and improved or updated the calibration coefficients.
 I used a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

moving window" technique to produce a density measure of what I called 
\emph on
deltas
\emph default
, i.e., the logarithm of the difference between results of the original LST
 formulas and measurements, which allowed us to inspect the respective distribut
ions.
 An Anderson-Darling test was used to check whether these 
\emph on
deltas
\emph default
 samples were likely to come from a normal distribution.
 I found that that was more likely if the 
\emph on
deltas
\emph default
 were plotted as a function of 
\begin_inset Formula $\nicefrac{H_{sb}}{L_{o}}$
\end_inset

.
 A 
\lang british
Levenberg-Marquardt
\lang english
 optimizing algorithm was then used to find the best function and coefficients
 for the LST formulas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The predictive skill of all three improved formulas (RMSE between 0.4 and
 0.41, negligible 
\emph on
bias
\emph default
 and percentage within a factor of 2 between 53% and 56%) was significantly
 better than their previous versions (RMSE between 0.52 and 0.56, 
\emph on
bias
\emph default
 between -0.4 and 0.5 and percentage within a factor of 2 between 32% and
 48%).
 The generality of the improved formulas was examined by applying the 
\emph on
bootstrapping
\emph default
 and 
\emph on
cross-validation
\emph default
 statistical methods, both of which returned similar results and confirmed
 the generality of the formulations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:Influence-of-profile"

\end_inset

 the influence of profile features was studied.
 I tested LST rates calculated with the UNIBEST-LT (using the Van Rijn 2004
 sediment transport formula) model for correlations with profile related
 parameters.
 The LST rates obtained with UNIBEST-LT varied significantly with the profile
 used ranging from less than 100 000 m³/y to over 400 000 m³/y.
 The root mean square downward slope showed the best correlation with the
 calculated LST rates and all parameters directly related with slope showed
 some correlation.
 It is important to notice that these results were obtained with a model
 and can not be considered a proper dataset.
 However, the sediment transport formulation has been calibrated with an
 extensive laboratory dataset.
 It is also important to notice that our UNIBEST-LT simulations didn't account
 for tide or wind generated currents and obviously also for 3D effects (longshor
e variability).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:chapter4"

\end_inset

 I examined the effect of wave breaking induced turbulence on LST rates
 and attempted to implement a model that takes that effect into account.
 The effect was clearly observed on laboratory data measured at the LSTF
 basin in Vicksburg.
 The dataset included tests with (Test 3) and without (Tests 1 and 5) plunging
 wave breaking.
 LST rates in Test 3 were significantly higher than in Test 1, even though
 the incident wave energy was similar.
 This difference could be caused by either higher longshore velocities,
 higher sediment concentrations or the combination of both effects.
 Sediment concentration and velocity measurements indicate that higher concentra
tions were the main cause as they were significantly higher in Test 3 over
 the bar, while velocities were similar in the three tests.
 One could safely conclude that these high concentrations were most likely
 caused by wave breaking induced turbulence resulting from the plunging
 breakers.
 Moreover, a sequence of waves that start breaking approximately at the
 same point of the domain could also have contributed to the higher sediment
 concentrations higher in the water column.
 In this case sediment stirring is done in steps, where the sediment does
 not settle totally between waves and is pushed higher in the water column
 by successive breaking waves.
 This mechanism potentially generates higher concentrations on steeper bars
 where waves with different heights start breaking at locations that are
 close to each other, over a short cross-shore stretch.
 These two effects: plunging breakers and narrow profile stretch where waves
 start breaking may have caused the higher suspended sediment concentrations
 observed in test 3.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In order to estimate LST rates accurately, a reliable wave propagation and
 longshore current generation model is necessary.
 I implemented a wave energy balance model and tested four different formulation
s for wave breaking dissipation.
 The results obtained with different formulations didn't vary notably but
 the formulation by 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Alsina2007"

\end_inset

 compared slightly better with the measurements and was chosen for that
 reason.
 From the implementation process I found the following aspects to be very
 important: 1) the difference between results with and without a roller
 were significant, especially on test 3 where the bar is more prominent.
 The roller distributes the longshore forcing across the surfzone resulting
 in a much more realistic prediction.
 2) within the roller model, the 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

 coefficient can influence significantly the trend of the velocities across
 the profile.
 This coefficient is understood as being the representation of the wave
 front angle.
 However, it was used as a free parameter in this study.
 3) The bottom friction coefficient is also a very important calibration
 parameter.
 It controls the magnitude of the velocity which is very sensitive to this
 parameter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I attempted to model numerically the influence of wave breaking induced
 turbulence on LST.
 For that a Bagnold/Bailard/Bowen model coupled with a simple turbulence
 model was chosen.
 The main challenge was to find a factor that accounts for the effects of
 plunging breakers and initiation of breaking that could be used to control
 the rate of turbulence decay in the vertical profile.
 The generally accepted parameters that account for these effects (
\begin_inset Formula $\nicefrac{H_{s}}{h}$
\end_inset

 and Iribarren number) depend only on local conditions and have no 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

memory
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of what happened to the waves before.
 Our solution uses the cross-shore gradient of the roller energy (
\begin_inset Formula $E_{r}$
\end_inset

) as a parameter.
 The only test with significant turbulence higher in the water column was
 Test 3 and was therefore used to calibrate the turbulence model.
 Obviously this calibration is poor (I could only use the two points over
 the bar) but I was unable to find another dataset to perform further validation.
 However, the model simulated the turbulence and longshore transport reasonably
 well in test 3 and is based on sound physical reasoning.
 For tests 1 and 5, i.e., the cases without plunging breakers, the Bagnold/Bailard
/Bowen sediment transport model was quite accurate at predicting LST across
 the profiles.
 It is important to note that a significant parcel of the transport occurs
 very close to the shore (referred in the text as the swash zone).
 It accounts for a significant part of the transport in Test 5 and a non
 negligible part in tests 1 and 3.
 The transport in the swash zone cannot be calculated with the kind of model
 used in this study as its assumptions lose validity on very shallow water.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:LST-model-evaluation"

\end_inset

 I investigated the validity of the model.
 On a first step I studied the model results on a parameter space exploration
 using flat profiles (profiles with a constant slope) and different wave
 inputs.
 It was observed that the results that include the turbulence effects start
 differing from the results without this turbulence effect in slopes steeper
 than 0.025, increasing almost exponentially in steeper slopes.
 The effect is stronger for conditions with lower wave steepness, suggesting
 a Iribarren number type of dependency.
 The results with turbulence effects were also compared to the results of
 the Kamphuis formula (eq.
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:kamphuis"

\end_inset

) presented in Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:Bulk-LST-formulas"

\end_inset

 as this formula also includes a slope factor.
 Results were of the same magnitude order, but the dependency on slope was
 stronger with our model, while the Kamphuis results showed an almost linear
 dependency.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Next, the same analysis was performed on real profiles, measured at the
 Dutch coast.
 I chose two profiles from the same location, one measured in the summer
 and one measured in the winter.
 The profiles, that had similar average slope values, differed in the smoothness
: the summer profile was much smoother while the winter profile had higher
 slope variability as expected.
 The calculated transport was significantly higher for the winter profile.
 Especially important for these results was the steep berm present in the
 winter profile.
 The LST values calculated are much higher when the breaking zone falls
 in that area.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the end I used the Vluchtenburg case study to find how the model performs
 when applied to a real case.
 Having in mind that the model could not be properly calibrated and validated
 I tried to assess the competence of the model in predicting the evolution
 of volume loss observed at the large-scale nourishment in Vluchtenburg
 in the first 10 months.
 The results indicate that the model could, although not perfectly, predict
 the trend of volume losses in the initial period.
 This result does not constitute proper validation but it is evidence that
 this way to include turbulence effects may be valid.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Discussion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this study I covered different approaches to estimate LST.
 I started analyzing the so called bulk formulas.
 As expected from their simplicity their accuracy is low.
 In this dataset and using the improved coefficients, almost 50% of the
 predicted points were more than a factor of two different from the measurements.
 Perhaps this variability can be further reduced with the inclusion of other
 coefficients that account for phenomena that are not included in the formulas.
 One such coefficient could be a representation of the effect of the slope
 on the breaking type which introduces differences on sediment stirring
 and consequently leads to higher LST.
 Currently only the Kamphuis formula includes a slope factor.
 Because this factor, slope at the breaker point, is hard to define, many
 times the average slope of the profile is introduced in the formula instead.
 This happens for two reasons: 1) rarely there is detailed information about
 the bathymetry and 2) even with that information one must decide which
 slope to use, which can be difficult when there are multiple breaking zones.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:Influence-of-profile"

\end_inset

 I attempted to find a slope related parameter that correlated well with
 LST results calculated with the model UNIBEST-LT on a high number of profiles
 measured on the Dutch coast.
 The best parameter was the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

root-mean-square downwards slope
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Intuitively, the use of this parameter makes sense because waves break
 only in downward slopes (going down in the offshore direction) and because
 the root-mean-square measure penalizes profiles with higher variability,
 i.e., profiles with steeper sections.
 Although the UNIBEST-LT model results vary proportionally with the slope
 (figure 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "fig:LST-vs-m-1"

\end_inset

), later in the study, when comparing with laboratory data, I found that
 it was not representing wave breaking accurately.
 For that reason I developed a new model that aimed to represent more accurately
 the processes involved in wave breaking.
 Unfortunately I did not have the data to properly validate this model and
 then repeat the exercise using it.
 Nevertheless, UNIBEST-LT seemed to produce reliable bulk load predictions
 in the laboratory case and that is a reason to trust these results.
 This is evidence that one should consider the use of profile related parameters
 as factors in bulk formulas.
 Unfortunately, the data set used in Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:Bulk-LST-formulas"

\end_inset

 does not have detailed profile information that could be used to test this
 hypothesis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The process-based model implemented in Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:chapter4"

\end_inset

 presents a novel parametrization for the vertical decay of wave breaking
 generated turbulence.
 The ruling parameter is proportional to the cross-shore gradient of the
 energy of the roller.
 I showed that this parameter captured the initiation of breaking and the
 breaking type effects present in the laboratory data.
 This parametrization also has the advantage of having a memory, i.e., it
 does not depend only on local factors but also on what happened before
 the wave reached a given position.
 It was this fact the led me to choose this parameter instead of a more
 traditional parameter such as the Iribarren number (eq.
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "eq:surf_similarity"

\end_inset

) that also looked like a good candidate (figure 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "fig:Suggested-scale-lengths"

\end_inset

).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As I explored the parameter space of the model results in Chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:LST-model-evaluation"

\end_inset

 I could see that as intended the model produces more transport on steeper
 slopes.
 Also remarkable is the fact that the results were of the same magnitude
 order as the bulk formulas results, despite being calibrated with only
 three data points that refer to a completely different (much smaller) scale.
 What needs attention in a further calibration/validation study are the
 very high transport values registered close to the shore (figure 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "fig:Variation-of-the"

\end_inset

), which happen when a maximum of transport occurs close to the end of the
 calculation domain.
 I did not find a numerical reason for this somewhat unexpected result but
 I do not rule out that there is a numerical problem.
 These very high values close to the shore may result in a overestimation
 of the bulk predictions that may have introduced more uncertainty in the
 modeling exercise with field data.
 As for our case study application, it is important to notice that the measured
 volume losses could also be influenced by factors that are not taken into
 account in the model such as: currents generated by tide or wind and the
 alongshore variability of the profiles.
 The tide generated currents may play some special role when one considers
 figure 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "fig:Variation-of-the"

\end_inset

.
 In this situation, more sediment is transported during low tide than in
 high tide.
 On the Dutch coast the horizontal and vertical tides are in phase which
 means that during low tide there is a southwards directed alongshore current
 which could generate a net southwards transport component that is independent
 of the wave generated alongshore current.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The knowledge of the dependency between the slope at the breaking point
 and LST has the potential be useful to control the volume loss rate of
 sediment nourishments in the coast.
 Depending on the goal of the nourishment, the slope at the breaking zone
 can be differently engineered: milder slope if the goal is that the sediment
 stays in the nourished area and steeper slope if the goal is that sediment
 spreads quickly to the adjacent areas.
 Another potential use of this knowledge is of a real time vulnerability
 warning system, when used in conjunction with coastal video monitoring
 systems like Argus 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Lippmann1989"

\end_inset

 and wave forecast.
 The monitoring can give an estimation of the bathymetry, e.g., with the cBathy
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Holman2013"

\end_inset

 algorithm, or using time-stacked images of the breaking waves to have a
 measure of the width of the transition zone between no-breaking and breaking
 waves.
 This measurement is directly related to the cross-shore gradient of roller
 energy.
 This way it would be possible to forecast potentially threatening LST gradients
 with a few days in advance.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Recommendations
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The most obvious recommendation is that much more LST data is needed if
 we want to improve the accuracy of the predictions.
 This is also stressed in 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Rijn2013"

\end_inset

.
 Even the most sophisticated model uses simplifications as it is impossible
 to simulate all processes up to the molecular level.
 Therefore there will always be a need for data to calibrate and validate
 the models.
 More specifically for our model, detailed concentration data in the surfzone
 is highly needed along with longshore current measurements.
 Also, turbulence measurements in the surfzone would be very useful for
 a calibration of the turbulence model.
 Once the model presented in chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:chapter4"

\end_inset

 is properly validated, the methodology presented in chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:Influence-of-profile"

\end_inset

 could be repeated using it.
 It would be then interesting to compare its results with UNIBEST-LT's and
 verify if the correlations between the calculated LST and the parameters
 considered still hold.
 With more data is also possible to improve the model and test, for example,
 a more sophisticated turbulence model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When measurements are carried out, it would be interesting to measure also
 the transport that occurs in the swash zone.
 Although this kind of transport does not concern the model presented in
 this study, it is important to know how important is its contribution.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In terms of general scientific research I emphasize the importance of a
 good validation (using the bootstrapping or cross-validation techniques)
 for scientific repeatability.
 If the data set is to be divided into calibration and validation sets,
 it is desirable that this division is made available so the results can
 be replicated.
 Also very important for scientific progress is the availability of the
 data sets so results can be easily replicated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Acknowledgements
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I would like to thank specially Rosh Ranasinghe for supervising my first
 three years of the PhD.
 I would also like to thank Jaap van Thiel de Vries for the great help in
 that same period of time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I would like to acknowledge the USACE and Ernest R.
 Smith for allowing public use of the laboratory dataset used in chapter
 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:chapter4"

\end_inset

.
 I also wish to express our gratitude to Dr.
 Atilla Bayram (Halcrow, Inc.) and Prof.
 Magnus Larson (Lund University, Sweden) for kindly providing the data set
 used in chapter 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "chap:Bulk-LST-formulas"

\end_inset

.
 The authors also acknowledge the contribution of Pieter van Gelder for
 his help and insights in the statistical analysis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This research was funded by 
\begin_inset Quotes grd
\end_inset

Funda
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
c{c}
\backslash
~a
\end_layout

\end_inset

o para a Ci
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
^e
\end_layout

\end_inset

ncia e a Tecnologia” and the European Union, to which I am deeply grateful.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "library2"
options "plainnat"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
